Copyright (C) 2002, 2003, Carnegie Mellon University and others.
All Rights Reserved.
This code is published under the Common Public License.


This file (QUICKINSTALL) describes, how to compile the IPOPT AMPL
solver executable and the IPOPT libraries (e.g. for the use in CUTEr).
More detailed information regarding installation can be found in the
INSTALL file.

1. Get the source code for IPOPT from the COIN-OR webpage

   http://www.coin-or.org/Tarballs

   as tarball (Ipopt*.tgz - whatever the latest one is) and copy it
   into a directory where you want to build the executable.

2. Uncompress and unpack the tarball:

   gunzip Ipopt*.tgz
   tar xf Ipopt*.tar

3. Change to the main directory for the installation:

   cd COIN/Ipopt

   Among other things you should find here the `configure' script. 

4. Get the required third party source code:

   The configure script will try to figure out if certain required
   components already exist on your system or if they have to be
   compiled yet.  To be on the safe side, we recommend you get the
   source for the following components in any case (even though they
   will not be compiled if precompile versions are found by the
   configuration script.)

   - BLAS and LAPACK:  Follow the instructions in

       OTHERS/blas/INSTALL.BLAS         and
       OTHERS/lapack/INSTALL.LAPACK

     (for details see Section 2.2.1 in the INSTALL file)

   - HSL subroutines:  Follow the instructions in

       OTHERS/HSL/INSTALL.HSL

     You will need at least one of the routines MA27, MA47, MA57.  If
     you have only access to the subroutines provided in the HSL
     Archive, we recommend that you obtain ma27ad.f and mc19.ad.f

     NOTE: *** YOU WILL HAVE TO GET AT LEAST ONE OF MA27, MA47, MA57 ***

     (for details see Section 2.2.2 in the INSTALL file)

   - AMPL Solver Library (only required if you want to build the IPOPT
     AMPL solver executable):  Follow the instructions in

     OTHERS/ASL/INSTALL.ASL

   Note:  If you want to install the necessary components to use IPOPT
          as a solver in CUTEr, it is assume that you already have
          installed CUTEr, and that your environment variables CUTER
          and MYCUTER are set accordingly.

5. Run the configuration script:

   In the main IPOPT directory (the one where the configuration script
   is located), type

   ./configure

   Make sure the last line of the output reads

   `configure: Configuration successful'

   If you want to specify nonstandard compilation flags etc, please
   read the INSTALL file.

   NOTE: If you want to compile the `IPOPT-C' option of the code which
         is able to handle complementarity constraints, you need to
         specify the option `--enable-mpcc' for the configure script.  In
         that case, the compiled code only works with AMPL (not with
         problems specified in Fortran or C or others).

6. Compile and install the code:

   In the main IPOPT directory type

   make install

   This will install the AMPL solver executable `ipopt' in the
   subdirectory `bin', from where you might want to copy it to any
   location in your path.  (If you didn't download the ASL source
   files, this executable will not be build.)

   If you want to use the AMPL solver `ipopt', let AMPL know by

   option solver ipopt;

   in AMPL.

   If you want to prepare CUTEr to use IPOPT, type

   make cuter

7. Enjoy, and if there are problems (or if it is working great and you
   are happy), let us know.

$Id: QUICKINSTALL 669 2005-03-02 22:56:28Z andreasw $
